---
layout: post
title: Irb History Itches Eliminated
keywords: irb, history, readline, readline history, irbrc, config
description: Irb, ruby’s interactive shell, is awesome for interactive programming. You can write a few lines and test out that language feature you weren’t aware of. However as your testing becomes more elaborate it can become annoying to rewrite your code. So how do you retrieve old code? Your history, of course.
tags:
  - lib:name=irb
  - post:type=snippet
  - post:lang=ruby
---
{{page.description}}

When I read programming articles, I like to find the final source code so I don’t copy and paste several times. I’m laaaayzy like that. So for this little irb bit, you can find the relevant irb code "here":http://github.com/cldwalker/irbfiles/blob/master/.irb/libraries/history_commands.rb.

From the ruby garden I found out where my history was stored, @Readline::HISTORY@. Wanting to make command history access as intuitive as possible, I wanted to pull up commands by the command numbers seen in irb’s prompt. Noticing that @Readline::HISTORY@ starts out with previous history, I saved its original size for later use. To pull up commands inclusively between two numbers I did the following:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
$original_history_size = Readline::HISTORY.size
def history_list(first_num,second_num=Readline::HISTORY.size - 1)
  Readline::HISTORY.to_a[(first_num + $original_history_size - 1) .. (second_num +
$original_history_size - 1) ]
end
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

And what if wanted to print these out in a more readable format or eval some of the lines to bring back the code to a previous state?

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
def print_history(*args)
  puts history_list(*args).join("\n")
end
def eval_history(*args)
  eval %[ #{history_list(*args).join("\n")} ]
end
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

Now, what if I wanted to only eval certain lines of the code say lines 1,4,8-12,15. Well I wrote a brief @Array@ method, @multislice@, that literally would take the previous string ‘1,4,8-12,15’ and return back the 1st,4th,8th-12th and 15th elements of an array. With @multislice@ I wrote a method similar to @history_list@.

As I wrote these methods I wondered if I’d satisified all my itches for a more rapid irb programming environment. Wellll, all except one: editing already entered irb code, without the hassle of consciously pasting code and naming a temporary file. So naturally I used an automatically generated tempfile using tempfile.rb. First I wrote a method to edit a string:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby%}
def edit(string=nil,editor=ENV['EDITOR'])
  editor ||= raise "editor must be given or defined by EDITOR environment variable"
  tempfile = Tempfile.new('edit')
  File.open(tempfile.path,'w') {|f| f.write(string) } if string
  system("#{editor} #{tempfile.path}")
  File.open(tempfile.path) {|f| f.read }
end
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

And then another to edit specified commands:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
def edit_history(*args)
  history_string = history_list_or_slice(*args).join("\n")
  edit(history_string)
end
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>
So for now my irb itches are satisfied. Are yours?