---
layout: post
title: Tags, Trees and Facets, Oh My!
keywords: tags, trees, facets, outlines, semantic tags, tag hierarchy, tag tree
tags:
  - tag
---

I've recently "rekindled my affair with organizing tags":http://github.com/cldwalker/tag-tree/tree/master. As in the "past":http://search.cpan.org/%7Ebozo/Fry-Lib-CDBI-Basic-0.15/lib/Fry/Lib/CDBI/Outline.pm, I started by outlining my tags. But this time some of it seems to be making sense.

Inspired by "wordnet":http://wordnetweb.princeton.edu/, I initially tried to organize my tags into lexical trees/outlines. This means I tried to organize the tags/words not by what they mean to me but what they mean to everybody. I gave up on this as my tags began to differ to much from what the word actually meant. (Yes, I'll have to revisit this someday when I want to effectively share my tag relationships with others.)

So I began organizing my tags semantically ie what they mean to me.  Trying to learn from past pitfalls, I resisted the urge to make mega tag trees and instead made multiple, lean inheritance trees. For an example of an inheritance tree, take this one of my learning_subject tag:
<pre class="github">
learning_subject
  math
    science
      chem
        bio
        astro
        physics
  philosophy
  art
</pre>

Reading from a leaf node to the root: chem (chemistry) is a science is a learning_subject. Of what use is this inheritance tree? Smarter querying and less tag pollution. If I tag an item with physics,  I can alternatively get it back using my science or learning_subject tag. Less tag pollution because I don't have to tag every physics item with science and learning_subject as well.  (Nothing new for you "semantic":http://zigtag.com/ "taggers":http://faviki.com/ "out there":http://entitydescriber.org/).

The more I organized my tags, the more I noticed that most of my trees were just lists. Why so many lists? I had tag lists of colors, programming languages, music genres, applications ... Were these nascent inheritance trees or "facets":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faceted_classification ? Were they serving as attributes of objects?  The more I looked around at my tags, the more I saw that I had been forming different objects with tags. I had application objects that had attributes of a programming language,  app type, operating system, etc. I had blog post objects that had attributes of learning type, programming language, author, etc. __In not treating tags as attribute values of a tag object, I had been cluttering my tags and losing semantic goodness.__ I had no idea if my tags were referring to an application mentioned in the webpage or the webpage itself. (Food for thought: at what point do facets become complex enough to be treated as an inheritance tree? What's the significance of that?)

So it looks like it's time for OO-tagging. With OO-tagging will come defining relationships between tag objects. I've also been itching to add modifiers between tags and their tagged subjects (either with a preposition or verb). Perhaps I can kill object relationships and modifiers with one coding stone. Then again, maybe "W is respected abroad":http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=OM3Z_Kskl_U .