---
layout: post
title: Hirb Tips For Rails
keywords: hirb config, hirb setup, hirb irbrc, hirb rails, script/console hirb, script/console irbrc, configure hirb, autoload hirb, customize hirb
description: <a href="http://tagaholic.me/hirb/">Hirb</a> has been getting the attention of Rails users with <a href="http://railscasts.com/episodes/176-searchlogic">Ryan Bates'</a> <a href="http://railscasts.com/episodes/177-model-versioning">screencasts</a>. To address these newcomers I'll share some basics on setting up, customizing and configuring hirb in the context of Rails' script/console. Non-Rails hirb users may find some useful tips here as well.
tags:
- gem:name=hirb
- gem:tags=rails
- post:type=snippet
- post:lang=ruby
related_tag: 'gem:*=hirb'
---
{{ page.description }}

h2. Setting Up script/console

So you're digging hirb and you want to have it autoload in script/console...

To do this for a local Rails app, append this to config/environment.rb:

{% highlight ruby %}
  if $0 == 'irb'
    require 'hirb'
    Hirb.enable
  end
{% endhighlight %}

And if you just want it in _all_ your Rails' script/console sessions, drop this in your ~/.irbrc:

{% highlight ruby %}
  if ENV['RAILS_ENV']
    require 'rubygems'
    require 'hirb'
    Hirb.enable
  end
{% endhighlight %}

Of course, these script/console setups work for any other gems you want to autoload. You may also want to try using/adding these gems into your script/console setup: "console_update":/2009/02/28/Console-Update-With-Your-Editor.html and "alias":/2009/07/07/alias-quickness-in-the-ruby-console.html.

h2. Configuring Hirb

Part of what makes hirb nice is that it just automagically works with @Hirb.enable@. But what happens when your columns are smushed and irrelevant columns are displayed? Just configure hirb. Hirb can be configured via config/hirb.yml or by passing a config directly to @Hirb.enable@.

For example, if you have a model @Url@ and you only want the columns id, name, description and tag_list to show up, you could make this config file:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  :output:
    Url:
      :options:
        :fields:
          - id
          - name
          - description
          - tag_list
</pre></notextile>

Or you could pass this same config without a config file:

{% highlight ruby %}
  Hirb.enable :output => {
    "Url"=>{
      :options=>{
        :fields=>%w{id name description tag_list}
      }
    }
  }
{% endhighlight %}

Some additional points:
* There are "a slew of other options":http://tagaholic.me/hirb/doc/classes/Hirb/Helpers/Table.html you can pass to :options. For example if you want to have vertical tables, try the :vertical option. If you want to format certain column strings after they've come from Rails, use the :filters option.
* To pass additional models in the above config, you would put them under :output.
* In the above config example, tag_list is actually not a column. Rather it's a method that returns associated tag objects that have been stringified. So yes, a table's fields can be _any_ object method. If a method doesn't return a string, customize its stringification with the :filters option.

h2. Customizing Hirb

The other day someone private messaged me about wanting to see the model name with each table's description. Here's what I came up with:

<script src="http://gist.github.com/180160.js"></script>

Basically I subclassed hirb's @ActiveRecord@ helper class and overrode the necessary methods. To use this custom helper class you would need to place it before @Hirb.enable@ and then configure hirb:

{% highlight ruby %}
  Hirb.enable :output=>{
    "ActiveRecord::Base"=>{:class=>:my_active_record_table, :ancestor=>true} 
  }
  # :class could also have been "Hirb::Helpers::MyActiveRecordTable"
{% endhighlight %}

--Seeing how simple it is to create and use your own custom hirb helpers, it should be fairly easy to use hirb with other non-Rails ORMs i.e. DataMapper or Sequel. Simply subclass "Hirb::Helpers::ObjectTable":http://github.com/cldwalker/hirb/blob/master/lib/hirb/helpers/object_table.rb and make some reasonable defaults as "Hirb::Helpers::ActiveRecordTable":http://github.com/cldwalker/hirb/blob/master/lib/hirb/helpers/active_record_table.rb does.-- *Update:* "Hirb supports several database gems including DataMapper and Sequel. If you want to add support for another database gem, create a dynamic view.":/2010/03/11/hirb-and-tables-for-all.html.

If you want tweak Hirb more for your script/console experience, don't forget to "read the docs":http://tagaholic.me/hirb/doc/!
Stay tuned for more "script/console goodness":http://github.com/cldwalker/boson/tree/master...
