---
layout: post
title: Local Gem Loads Your Current Code
keywords: ruby gem, local_gem, ruby, require, load, load_path, edge
description: The other day while actively <a href="http://github.com/cldwalker/core/tree/master">developing a gem</a>, I got tired of rake reinstalling it to test its effect in irb with some other gems. I wanted to use the edge version of my gem, version <b>now</b>.
tags:
  - gem:name=local_gem
  - post:lang=ruby
  - post:type=tutorial
related_tag: *:*=ruby
---
{{page.description}}

So I hacked up @$LOAD_PATH@:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
  $LOAD_PATH.unshift '/my/path/to/gem/lib'
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

This effectively made my live gem directory a gem, as far as requiring files is concerned.  However once I did this in irb a couple of times and even in a file, it started to feel dirty and repetitious.  Why couldn't I just require my local gem just like I do when it's installed in my gem directories?  So I hacked on it later and out came "LocalGem":http://github.com/cldwalker/local_gem/tree/master.

LocalGem simply maps names to file paths and when given a name, adds its corresponding path to @$LOAD_PATH@ like above. You can setup the name-path mapping via a yaml config file or a method call.

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
  require 'local_gem'
  LocalGem.setup_config do |c|
    c.gems = {'mygem'=>'/path/to/mygem', 'anothergem'=>'/path/to/anothergem'}
  end
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

LocalGem then provides two methods, @local_gem()@ and @local_require()@ to act like @gem()@ and @require()@ but with knowledge of your local gems. You can use these two methods in one of three ways, depending on how much you want LocalGem to invade your namespace:

Peace time:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
  LocalGem.local_gem 'mygem'
  LocalGem.local_require 'anothergem'
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

Diplomacy is fading:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
  include LocalGem
  local_gem 'mygem'
  local_require 'anothergem'
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

You're fscked:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
  require 'local_gem/override'
  gem 'mygem'
  require 'anothergem'
{% endhighlight %} </notextile>

Give it a whirl with:
<pre class="code"> sudo gem install cldwalker-local_gem -s http://gems.github.com </pre>

Since LocalGem effectively lets you make any subset of Ruby code gem-like, some other cool uses for it could be:
* To gemify all those cloned Github projects that aren't gems. You may want to look at "coral":http://github.com/mislav/coral/tree/master if you're doing this enough.
* Wrap up a subsection of a gem as a local gem
* Wrap up any group of unloved Ruby files in the same directory as a local gem

Feel free to check the purty "docs":http://cldwalker.github.com/local_gem/doc/index.html and "github page":http://cldwalker.github.com/local_gem/ as well.
