---
layout: post
title: Boson And Hirb Interactions
keywords: ruby tasks, ruby commands, ruby task manager, ruby command manager, irb command manager, command framework, rake tasks, thor tasks, ruby shell
description: In <a href="/2009/10/14/boson-command-your-ruby-universe.html">the last post</a>, I introduced <a href="http://github.com/cldwalker/boson">Boson</a> and its <a href="/2009/10/14/boson-command-your-ruby-universe.html#commands_with_options">options for commands</a>. What I didn't mention was that Boson also gives those commands default options. Among them are ones that control rendering your command's output with <a href="http://tagaholic.me/hirb/">Hirb</a> and even toggle rendering. Simply put, at the flick of a switch, commands can have Hirb's views.
published: false
tags:
- gem:name=boson
- gem:name=hirb
- gem:topic=options
- lib:name=irb
- post:lang=ruby
- post:type=tutorial
related_tag: gem:*=(boson|irb)
---
{{ page.description }}

h2(#hirbs_handy_tables). "Hirb's Handy Tables":#hirbs_handy_tables

Back in "an old post":/2009/06/19/page-irb-output-and-improve-ri-with-hirb.html, I concluded with a mention that Hirb's @table()@ can handle arrays of about any object (responding to @to_s@). Unless you read "the docs":http://tagaholic.me/hirb/doc/classes/Hirb/Helpers/Table.html or tests, that probably didn't register much. So let's see it in action:

<notextile><pre class='console'>
  bash> irb
  >> require 'hirb'; extend Hirb::Console
  => main

  # Basic array or anything that responds to :to_a
  >> table 1..3
  +-------+
  | value |
  +-------+
  | 1     |
  | 2     |
  | 3     |
  +-------+
  3 rows in set
  => true

  # Array of arrays
  >> table (1..5).map {|e| [e, Math.sqrt(e)] }
  +----+------------------+
  | 0  | 1                |
  +----+------------------+
  | 1  | 1.0              |
  | 2  | 1.4142135623731  |
  | 3  | 1.73205080756888 |
  | 4  | 2.0              |
  | 5  | 2.23606797749979 |
  +----+------------------+
  5 rows in set
  => true

  # Array of hashes
  >> table [{:name=>'Brain', :occupation=>'Take over the world'}, {:name=>'Batman', :occupation=>'Save the world'},
    {:name=>'Joker', :occupation=>'Destroy the world'}, {:name=>'Pinky', :occupation=>'Annoy Brain'}]
  +--------+---------------------+
  | name   | occupation          |
  +--------+---------------------+
  | Brain  | Take over the world |
  | Batman | Save the world      |
  | Joker  | Destroy the world   |
  | Pinky  | Annoy Brain         |
  +--------+---------------------+
  4 rows in set
  => true

  # Choose only certain keys of hashes with :fields
  >> table [{:name=>'Brain', :occupation=>'Take over the world'}, {:name=>'Batman', :occupation=>'Save the world'},
    {:name=>'Joker', :occupation=>'Destroy the world'}, {:name=>'Pinky', :occupation=>'Annoy Brain'}],
    :fields=>[:name]
  +--------+
  | name   |
  +--------+
  | Brain  |
  | Batman |
  | Joker  |
  | Pinky  |
  +--------+
  4 rows in set
  => true

  # Array of Date objects, stringified by to_s()
  >> table (1..5).map {|e| Date.today + e }
  +------------+
  | 0          |
  +------------+
  | 2009-10-15 |
  | 2009-10-16 |
  | 2009-10-17 |
  | 2009-10-18 |
  | 2009-10-19 |
  +------------+
  5 rows in set
  => true

  # Passing :fields on any object simply calls its methods
  # Comparing Date formats:
  >> table (1..5).map {|e| Date.today + e }, :fields=>[:to_s, :ajd, :civil, :jd, :mjd]
  +------------+-----------+----------+---------+-------+
  | to_s       | ajd       | civil    | jd      | mjd   |
  +------------+-----------+----------+---------+-------+
  | 2009-10-15 | 4910239/2 | 20091015 | 2455120 | 55119 |
  | 2009-10-16 | 4910241/2 | 20091016 | 2455121 | 55120 |
  | 2009-10-17 | 4910243/2 | 20091017 | 2455122 | 55121 |
  | 2009-10-18 | 4910245/2 | 20091018 | 2455123 | 55122 |
  | 2009-10-19 | 4910247/2 | 20091019 | 2455124 | 55123 |
  +------------+-----------+----------+---------+-------+
  5 rows in set
  => true
</pre></notextile>

Keep Hirb's handy tables in mind as you see Boson make use of them.

h2(#to_render_or_not_to_render). "To Render or Not To Render":#to_render_or_not_to_render

In the previous post, I demonstrated "adding options to commands":/2009/10/14/boson-command-your-ruby-universe.html#commands_with_options. Let's create another such command but this time to explore Boson's default options:

{% highlight ruby %}
  # Drop this in ~/.boson/commands/pinky.rb
  module Pinky
    #@options :count=>:numeric
    # Give Pinky a voice
    def speak(*args)
      options = args[-1].is_a?(Hash) ? args.pop : {}
      puts "Hey Brain! #{args.join(' ')}"
      if options[:count]
        puts "Brain, I can count to #{options[:count]}!"
        1..options[:count]
      end
    end
  end
{% endhighlight %}

Let Pinky do his thing:

<notextile><pre class='console'>
  bash> irb
  >> speak "What does this do?"
  Hey Brain! What does this do?
  => nil

  # Give Pinky a number to count to
  >> speak 'La-di-da -c5'
  Hey Brain! La-di-da
  Brain, I can count to 5!
  => 1..5

  # Turn on Hirb rendering for return value
  >> speak 'La-di-da --render -c5'
  Hey Brain! La-di-da
  Brain, I can count to 5!
  +-------+
  | value |
  +-------+
  | 1     |
  | 2     |
  | 3     |
  | 4     |
  | 5     |
  +-------+
  5 rows in set
  => true

  # Pass Hirb's rendering a :fields option
  >> speak 'Brain!!! -r -f to_s,to_f -c3'
  Hey Brain! Brain!!!
  Brain, I can count to 3!
  +------+------+
  | to_s | to_f |
  +------+------+
  | 1    | 1.0  |
  | 2    | 2.0  |
  | 3    | 3.0  |
  +------+------+
  3 rows in set
  => true

</pre></notextile>

Nice! Simply by passing an option, Boson converted our command's return value into a well-formatted Hirb table. Although Boson uses Hirb's @table@ rendering by default, you can use _any_ "Hirb helper class":http://github.com/cldwalker/hirb/tree/master/lib/hirb/helpers, especially ones you've made. So what are the implications of this? __Any Boson command can have any view generated from its return value without adding view code to the method__. If you're wondering how this is possible, see "Boson::Scientist":http://tagaholic.me/boson/doc/classes/Boson/Scientist.html which redefines a command's method to have a Hirb rendering engine appended to it. For a more compelling example see the "github library":#github_boson_library below.

h2(#boson_commands_global_options). "A Boson Command's Global Options":#boson_commands_global_options

Each Boson command with options, or an option command, comes with global command options for rendering, sorting, etc. For now, these global options must come before a command's options. So let's see what they are:

<notextile><pre class='console'>
  # Call up an option command's verbose help
  >> speak '-hv'
  speak [text][--count=N]

  COMMAND OPTIONS
  +---------+-------+---------+
  | Option  | Alias | type    |
  +---------+-------+---------+
  | --count | -c    | numeric |
  +---------+-------+---------+

  GLOBAL/RENDER OPTIONS
  +----------------+-------+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
  | Option         | Alias | type    | Description                                               |
  +----------------+-------+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
  | --class        | -c    | string  | Hirb helper class which renders                           |
  | --fields       | -f    | array   | Displays fields in the order given                        |
  | --global       | -g    | string  | Pass a string of global options without the dashes        |
  | --help         | -h    | boolean | Display a command's help                                  |
  | --max_width    | -m    | numeric | Max width of a table                                      |
  | --pretend      | -p    | boolean | Display what a command would execute without executing it |
  | --render       | -r    | boolean | Toggle a command's default rendering behavior             |
  | --reverse_sort | -R    | boolean | Reverse a given sort                                      |
  | --sort         | -s    | string  | Sort by given field                                       |
  | --verbose      | -v    | boolean | Increase verbosity for help, errors, etc.                 |
  | --vertical     | -V    | boolean | Display a vertical table                                  |
  +----------------+-------+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
  => true

  # Use --pretend to see what arguments are being passed to your command without running it.
  # Useful when debugging options and aliased option values
  >> speak '--pretend -r -c3 Testing'
  Arguments: ["Testing", {:count=>3}]
  Global options: {:pretend=>true, :render=>true}
  => true

  # Use --vertical to convert a table to a vertical one.
  # Useful for database record tables
  >> speak '-rV -c3 Que pasa!'
  Hey Brain! Que pasa!
  Brain, I can count to 3!
  ******* 1. row *******
  value: 1
  ******* 2. row *******
  value: 2
  ******* 3. row *******
  value: 3
  3 rows in set
  => true

  # Resize a table's maximum width
  >> speak '-r -m7 -c3 Blah blah!'
  Hey Brain! Blah blah!
  Brain, I can count to 3!
  +-----+
  | val |
  +-----+
  | 1   |
  | 2   |
  | 3   |
  +-----+
  3 rows in set
  => true

  # When a global option conflicts with a command's options, pass it via --global
  >> speak '-g "c=auto_table" -r -c3 What year is it?'
  Hey Brain! What year is it?
  Brain, I can count to 3!
  +-------+
  | value |
  +-------+
  | 1     |
  | 2     |
  | 3     |
  +-------+
  3 rows in set
  => true
  # the above could also have been:
  >> speak '--class=auto_table -r -c3 What year is it?'
  
  # We'll demonstrate --sort and --reverse_sort soon enough ...
</pre></notextile>

h2(#github_boson_library). "A Github Boson Library":#github_boson_library

Using Pinky was fun to annoy Brain but let's dig into a more useful example. Consider this command to view a "github":http://github.com user's repositories using "the repository API":http://develop.github.com/p/repo.html:

{% highlight ruby %}
  # Drop in ~/.boson/commands/github_example.rb
  module GithubExample
    # @render_options :fields=>{:default=>[:name, :watchers, :forks, :homepage, :description],
    #  :values=>[:homepage, :name, :forks, :private, :watchers, :fork, :url, :description, :owner, :open_issues]}
    # @options :user=>'cldwalker'
    # Displays a github user's repositories
    def repos(options={})
      YAML::load(get("http://github.com/api/v2/yaml/repos/show/#{options[:user]}"))['repositories']
    end
  end
{% endhighlight %}

Some points:
* The output of @repos()@ is an array of hashes, perfect for Hirb's tables.
* The @get()@ method is a default Boson command which does a get request on a url and returns the response body.
* Unlike Pinky's @speak()@, this command defaults to rendering with Hirb because @render_options@ is present.
* @render_options@, like @options@, takes "a hash of options":http://tagaholic.me/boson/doc/classes/Boson/OptionParser.html#M000069 which are passed to a Hirb helper.
* @render_options@ can take option attributes for existing global options or new options specific to your Hirb helper.
* In the above @render_options@, we pass option attributes :default and :values to the global option :fields.
* The :values option attribute let's us do sweet "aliasing of option values":/2009/10/14/boson-command-your-ruby-universe.html#aliasing_option_values

Let's try it out:

<notextile><pre class='console'>
  bash> irb
  >> repos '-u defunkt'
  +---------------------------+----------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | name                      | watchers | forks | homepage                                                          | description                                                                       |
  +---------------------------+----------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | grit                      | 10       | 1     |                                                                   |                                                                                   |
  | exception_logger          | 214      | 31    |                                                                   |                                                                                   |
  | ambition                  | 158      | 3     | http://defunkt.github.com/ambition                                | include Enumerable                                                                |
  | starling                  | 54       | 0     | http://rubyforge.org/projects/starling                            |                                                                                   |
  | subtlety                  | 6        | 1     | http://subtlety.errtheblog.com/                                   | Subtlety: SVN => RSS, hAtom => Atom                                               |
  | zippy                     | 8        | 1     |                                                                   | Zippy lil’ zipcode lib.                                                           |
  | cache_fu                  | 265      | 34    | http://errtheblog.com                                             | Everyone's favorite memcached plugin for ActiveRecord.                            |
  | mofo                      | 65       | 9     | http://mofo.rubyforge.org/                                        | Mofo is a fast and simple microformat parser, based on a concise DSL and Hpricot. |
  # ...

  # We can toggle rendering off by passing --render and get back the original return value
  >> repos('-r -u defunkt').size
  => 89

  # Oh the good ol days of inspect
  >> repos('-r -u defunkt').slice(0,2)
  => [{:forks=>1, :url=>"http://github.com/defunkt/grit", :name=>"grit", :watchers=>10, :private=>false, :owner=>"defunkt", :fork=>true,
    :open_issues=>0}, {:forks=>31, :url=>"http://github.com/defunkt/exception_logger", :name=>"exception_logger", :watchers=>214,
    :private=>false, :description=>"", :owner=>"defunkt", :fork=>false, :open_issues=>0, :homepage=>""}]
  
  # Remembering we can pass rendering options, let's only view a couple of fields
  >> repos '-f n,w,op -u defunkt'  # or '--fields name,watchers,open_issues --user defunkt'
  +---------------------------+----------+-------------+
  | name                      | watchers | open_issues |
  +---------------------------+----------+-------------+
  | grit                      | 10       | 0           |
  | exception_logger          | 214      | 0           |
  | ambition                  | 158      | 0           |
  | starling                  | 54       | 0           |
  | subtlety                  | 6        | 0           |
  | zippy                     | 8        | 0           |
  | cache_fu                  | 265      | 2           |
  | mofo                      | 65       | 1           |
  # ...

  # What about global sorting options?
  # Let's see wycats least popular repositories
  >> repos '-s=w -u wycats' # or '--sort=watchers --user=wycats'
  +---------------------------+----------+-------+------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | name                      | watchers | forks | homepage                                 | description                                                                                 |
  +---------------------------+----------+-------+------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | rails-shared-benches      | 0        | 0     |                                          | Some Rails benches that work across Rails versions and can be used to compare perf progress |
  | rails                     | 0        | 7     | http://rubyonrails.org                   | Ruby on Rails                                                                               |
  | serialize_location_header | 1        | 0     |                                          | Serialize the location header if it exists                                                  |
  | ufo_book                  | 2        | 0     |                                          | Uses the flying_saucer jruby gem to compile books                                           |
  | ruby-mozjs                | 2        | 0     |                                          | Mozilla JavaScript Engine (SpiderMonkey) bindings for Ruby                                  |
  | rack                      | 3        | 0     | http://rack.rubyforge.org/               | a modular Ruby webserver interface                                                          |
  | lonestar                  | 3        | 0     |                                          |                                                                                             |
 # ...

 # And most popular repositories
 >> repos '-s=w -R -u wycats' # or '--sort=watchers --reverse_sort --user=wycats'
 +---------------------------+----------+-------+------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
 | name                      | watchers | forks | homepage                                 | description                                                                                 |
 +---------------------------+----------+-------+------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
 | merb-core                 | 611      | 59    | http://www.merbivore.com                 | Merb Core: All you need. None you don't.                                                    |
 | merb                      | 508      | 102   | http://www.merbivore.com                 | master merb branch                                                                          |
 | thor                      | 330      | 26    | http://www.yehudakatz.com                | A scripting framework that replaces rake and sake                                           |
 | merb-more                 | 316      | 32    | http://www.merbivore.com                 | Merb More: The Full Stack. Take what you need; leave what you don't.                        |
 | merb-plugins              | 313      | 42    | http://www.merbivore.com                 | Merb Plugins: Even more modules to hook up your Merb installation                           |
 | moneta                    | 264      | 28    | http://www.yehudakatz.com                | a unified interface to key/value stores                                                     |
 | bundler                   | 228      | 20    |                                          |                                                                                             |
 # ...
</pre></notextile>

As you can see, writing a Boson command to interact with the Github API is pretty easy. If you liked this sample command, install and try my "Github Boson library":http://github.com/cldwalker/irbfiles/blob/master/boson/commands/site/github.rb :

<notextile><pre class='console'>
  bash> boson install http://github.com/cldwalker/irbfiles/raw/master/boson/commands/site/github.rb
  Saved to /Users/bozo/.boson/commands/github.rb.

  # List the commands that come with the github library
  bash> boson commands -q=l github
 +---------------+--------+-------+------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | full_name     | lib    | alias | usage                                          | description                                                           |
  +---------------+--------+-------+------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | checkout      | github |       | [url]                                          | Clones a github repo and opens in textmate                            |
  | user_search   | github |       | [query]                                        | Search users                                                          |
  | repo          | github |       | [_search(query]                                | Opens a repo with an optional path in a browser                       |
  | repo_search   | github |       | [query]                                        | Search repositories                                                   |
  | commit_list   | github |       | [user_repo][--branch=master]                   | List commits of a given user-repo                                     |
  | user_repos    | github |       | [--user=cldwalker] [--fork_included] [--stats] | Displays a user's repositories                                        |
  | raw_file      | github |       | [file_url]                                     | Downloads the raw form of a github repo file url                      |
  | repo_network  | github |       | [user_repo][--user=cldwalker]                  | Displays network of a given user-repo i.e. wycats-thor or defunkt/rip |
  | repos_watched | github |       | [user]                                         | Lists repos watched by user                                           |
  | user_follows  | github |       | [user]                                         | List users a user follows                                             |
  +---------------+--------+-------+------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

  # Let's do a repository search
  bash> boson repo_search tagging -s=f  #or tagging --sort=followers
  +------------------------------+---------------+-----------+------------+----------------------+------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
  | name                         | username      | followers | language   | pushed               | score      | description                                                     |
  +------------------------------+---------------+-----------+------------+----------------------+------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
  | acts-as-taggable-on          | mbleigh       | 633       | Ruby       | 2009-10-14T15:16:26Z | 0.46670222 | A tagging plugin for Rails applications that allows for cust... |
  | is_taggable                  | giraffesoft   | 201       | Ruby       | 2009-08-19T16:03:36Z | 0.3879375  | Tagging that doesn't want to be on steroids. It's skinny and... |
  | acts_as_taggable_on_steroids | jviney        | 118       | Ruby       | 2009-06-12T06:15:45Z | 0.57809234 | Tagging for Ruby on Rails                                       |
  | acts_as_taggable_redux       | geemus        | 100       | Ruby       | 2009-10-05T20:30:11Z | 0.46670222 | Allows for user owned tags to be added to multiple classes, ... |
  | prettyPrint.js               | jamespadolsey | 99        | JavaScript | 2009-06-07T10:17:55Z | 0.3879375  | An in-browser JavaScript variable dumper, similar in functio... |
  | django-uni-form              | pydanny       | 79        | Python     | 2009-09-12T23:47:49Z | 0.31662944 | Django forms are easily rendered as tables, paragraphs, and ... |
  | odf-report                   | sandrods      | 74        | Ruby       | 2009-09-24T03:49:09Z | 0.4354762  | Generates ODF files, given a template (.odt) and data, repla... |
  | prawn-format                 | jamis         | 64        | Ruby       | 2009-03-24T15:30:25Z | 0.3403988  | An extension to the Prawn PDF generation library that allows... |
  # ...

  # Latest commits for a given project in format :user/:repo
  bash> boson commit_list wycats/bundler
  | id                                       | authored_date             | message                                                                              |
  +------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | 8795746808647860b7b44bbb23bf3c64423eb1c8 | 2009-10-06T17:30:31-07:00 | Always generate bin files no matter what.                                            |
  | 87201c825ff487077c4e1b55d449202007be1a42 | 2009-10-06T15:15:41-07:00 | Bump up the version number to 0.7.0.pre                                              |
  | 53c589e1d440c2874ce57ee80047b54af2e8a646 | 2009-10-06T15:15:26-07:00 | Fix branches and #git with block calls                                               |
  | 5bbb5740f3d576f57bd1c7b5c5557b781c22189b | 2009-10-06T12:15:24-07:00 | Add a glob option to directories                                                     |
  | 6f263a435645a2fb76874d0c7f2c83d59eef8e92 | 2009-10-06T00:06:34-07:00 | Add a test that tests overwriting existing bin files                                 |
  | a3694bf09ac8d3093c2ce1a744992e590ab50b5e | 2009-10-05T23:34:39-07:00 | It handles the simple git method as a block                                          |
  # ...

  # List network of a given :user/:repo sorted by most watched
  bash> boson repo_network rails/rails -s=w -R  # or rails/rails --sort=watchers --reverse_sort
  +-----------------------+----------+-------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | owner                 | watchers | forks | homepage                    | description                                                                                                                          |
  +-----------------------+----------+-------+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | rails                 | 4308     | 702   | http://rubyonrails.org      | Ruby on Rails                                                                                                                        |
  | josh                  | 35       | 4     | http://rubyonrails.org      | Ruby on Rails                                                                                                                        |
  | relevance             | 13       | 0     | http://rubyonrails.org      | Ruby on Rails                                                                                                                        |
  | miloops               | 11       | 0     | http://rubyonrails.org      | Ruby on Rails                                                                                                                        |
  | revolutionhealth      | 10       | 0     | http://rubyonrails.org      | Ruby on Rails                                                                                                                        |
  | xing                  | 10       | 0     | http://rubyonrails.org      | Ruby on Rails                                                                                                                        |
  | 37signals             | 9        | 0     | http://rubyonrails.org      | Ruby on Rails                                                                                                                        |
 # ...
</pre></notextile>

h2. Conclusion

As you've seen, Boson-Hirb interactions are quite good. To learn more about Boson, "read it's docs":http://tagaholic.me/boson/doc/. I'm eager to see what useful Boson libraries others will come up with. If you haven't already <span class='github'>gem install boson</span>.