---
layout: post
title: Page Irb Output And Improve Ri With Hirb
keywords: better ri, smarter ri, improve ri, page irb, irb pager, ruby ri, hirb, ruby pager, rdoc ri, ruby menu, console menu, terminal menu, irb menu
description: Hirb just got two sweet features with the 0.2 release - a pager and a selection menu. With the pager, you'll never have to scroll because irb dumped an ungodly <code>inspect()</code> on you. <a href="#ri">With the selection menu</a>, you'll have <a href="http://rdoc.rubyforge.org/RI_txt.html">RI</a> taking useful method dumps in no time.
tags:
  - gem:name=hirb
  - lib:name=irb
  - lib:name=ri
  - post:lang=ruby
  - post:type=tutorial
related_tag: gem:*=(hirb|irb)
---
<style text="type/css">
  #ri { padding-top: 50px }
</style>
{{ page.description }}

To play with what follows, you'll need the latest Hirb:
<notextile><pre class="github">
  gem install cldwalker-hirb --source http://gems.github.com
</pre></notextile>

h2. Paging With Irb

If you're unsure that irb's output can be quite horrendous at times:
<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb -rubygems
  >> Gem.source_index
  # Human sacrifice, dogs and cats living together ... mass hysteria!
</pre></notextile>

Sure, we can turn it off:
<notextile><pre class="console">
  >> conf.echo = false
  >> Gem.source_index
  >>
  # Sorry to disappoint you Dr. Venkman
</pre></notextile>

But sometimes we want to *see* some of the output, we want to *explore* an API, we want to sift through an object's guts and *find* something useful. But mostly, we just don't want to be *crapped on* for executing our half-baked crap ... I mean code. Enter the pager:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb -rubygems -rhirb
  >> Hirb.enable
  => nil
  >> Gem.source_index
  => # Just a screenful of output here. Cheers and hip hoorays ensue.
</pre></notextile>

Is that it? That's it. @Hirb@ by default has paging turned on. You can specify your own pager command or have it detect your system's pager i.e. @ENV['PAGER']@, less or more. If no system pager is detected it defaults to a __very basic__ ruby pager: you page or you quit.

So you may be wondering, is every irb output paged? Hell no. Hirb is aware of your console's width and height and uses that to only page output that exceeds a screenful. If you're a *nixer, Hirb should be able to detect your width and height:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb -rubygems -rhirb
  >> Hirb.enable
  => nil
  >> Hirb::View.width
  => 208
  >> Hirb::View.height
  => 51

  # Sweet, hirb detected my console size.
  # I can take advantage of this auto-detection i.e. after changing my console window's size.
  >> Hirb::View.resize
  => [172, 45]
</pre></notextile>

If autodetection doesn't work, it's still pretty easy:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb -rubygems -rhirb
  # Let's determine our width.
  # Use the line that starts wrapping to give you an approximate width.
  >> 80.step(200, 10) {|e| puts e.to_s + "*" * (e - e.to_s.size) ; sleep 0.2 }
  80******************************************************************************
  90****************************************************************************************
  
  # Let's do something similar for height.
  # Stop it when two numbers aren't on the same screen anymore
  # 25.step(80, 5) {|e| puts "*\n" * (e - 1) + e.to_s ; sleep 1.5 }
  
  
  >> Hirb.enable :width=>your_width, :height=>your_height
  => nil

  # If you change your console window, just explicitly pass your width and height:
  >> Hirb::View.resize(120, 30)
</pre></notextile>

h2(#ri). Improving RI With Menus

<a href="http://rdoc.rubyforge.org/RI_txt.html">RI</a> is pretty handy as far as keystrokes to documentation goes. But it can be improved.

Before improving it, let's look at the selection menu that comes with Hirb:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb -rubygems -rhirb
  >> extend Hirb::Console
  => main
  >> menu ('a'..'h').to_a
  +--------+-------+
  | number | value |
  +--------+-------+
  | 1      | a     |
  | 2      | b     |
  | 3      | c     |
  | 4      | d     |
  | 5      | e     |
  | 6      | f     |
  | 7      | g     |
  | 8      | h     |
  +--------+-------+
  8 rows in set
  Choose : # Here's where you type
  # Typing: 1-3,6-7  => ["a", "b", "c", "f", "g"]
  # Typing: 1..3,6..7  => ["a", "b", "c", "f", "g"]
  # Typing: * => ["a", "b", "c", "d", "e", "f", "g", "h"]
  # Typing: enter/return => []
</pre></notextile>

As you can see, @menu()@ uses "Hirb's tables":/2009/03/13/hirb-irb-on-the-good-stuff.html to display the array. You can select a subset by specifying ranges with @-@ and separating multiple ranges with @,@. If you're feeling rubyish you can use @..@ for ranges i.e. @1..3, 6..7@. So what's the big deal? Ruby's @Array.slice()@ can do most of this already. Well, let's go back to rdoc's @ri@.

You may or may not be familiar with ri's interactive mode, @ri -i@. Basically it allows you to autocomplete methods as you would in irb. This ri feature seems to have "been started":http://rubyforge.org/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=20663&group_id=627&atid=2474 by "Daniel Choi":http://danielchoi.com/software/ri-enhanced.html. As part of his patch he had "a basic selection menu":http://danielchoi.com/software/ri-enhanced.html for resolving multiple matches on a query. Let's see if we can continue where Daniel left off using Hirb's @menu()@.

First we need to figure out how to query ri and get back a list of matches. If you look at the "ri command":http://github.com/rubyspec/matzruby/blob/9b20bdc753b3ef97e9bedfffa78da759652f2b59/bin/ri, you see that ri is run by the class "RDoc::RI::Driver":http://github.com/rubyspec/matzruby/blob/9b20bdc753b3ef97e9bedfffa78da759652f2b59/lib/rdoc/ri/driver.rb. So if we create an @RDoc::RI::Driver@ object, how can we select a list of matches? If you look around, you'll figure out "select_methods()":http://github.com/rubyspec/matzruby/blob/9b20bdc753b3ef97e9bedfffa78da759652f2b59/lib/rdoc/ri/driver.rb#L644 is what we want:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb -rubygems
  >> require 'rdoc/ri/driver'
  => true
  => conf.echo = false
  >> driver = RDoc::RI::Driver.new(RDoc::RI::Driver.process_args(['set_trace']))
  >> matches = driver.select_methods(/set_trace/)
  >> conf.echo = true
  >> matches.class
  => Array
  >> matches[0]
  => {"visibility"=>"public", "name"=>"set_trace", "is_singleton"=>true, "params"=>"( arg )", "block_params"=>nil, "aliases"=>[],
   "full_name"=>"DEBUGGER__::set_trace", "comment"=>nil, "source_path"=>"Ruby 1.8"}

   # Let's pass a specific match back to ri to get it's documentation
   >> RDoc::RI::Driver.run [ matches[0]['full_name'] ]
   -------------------------------------------------- DEBUGGER__::set_trace
        DEBUGGER__::set_trace( arg )

        From Ruby 1.8
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------
        [no description]
   => ["DEBUGGER__::set_trace"]
</pre></notextile>

Knowing how to extract an ri query result and feed it back to ri, let's use a Hirb menu with its block syntax which passes the chosen items to the block:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  >> require 'hirb'; extend Hirb::Console
  => main
  >> menu(matches, :fields=>['full_name']) {|e| RDoc::RI::Driver.run(e.map {|e| e['full_name']}) }
  +--------+-----------------------------------+
  | number | full_name                         |
  +--------+-----------------------------------+
  | 1      | DEBUGGER__::set_trace             |
  | 2      | DEBUGGER__::Context#set_trace     |
  | 3      | DEBUGGER__::Context#set_trace_all |
  | 4      | Kernel#set_trace_func             |
  +--------+-----------------------------------+
  4 rows in set
  Choose : 1-3 # You type 1-3
  # Prints the ri documentation for the first 3 methods
</pre></notextile>

All of a sudden we have the choice to see the documentation of *any* method(s)! Simply type a number or a range of numbers. What if we could apply this to a Ruby class i.e. list a class' methods and choose from them?:

<notextile> {% highlight ruby %}
  def ri(original_query, regex=nil)
    query = original_query.to_s
    ri_driver = RDoc::RI::Driver.new(RDoc::RI::Driver.process_args([query]))

    # if query is a class ri recognizes
    if (class_cache = ri_driver.class_cache[query])
      methods = []
      class_methods = class_cache["class_methods"].map {|e| e["name"]}
      instance_methods = class_cache["instance_methods"].map {|e| e["name"]}
      if regex
        class_methods = class_methods.grep(/#{regex}/)
        instance_methods = instance_methods.grep(/#{regex}/)
      end  
      all_methods = class_methods.each {|e| methods << {:name=>"#{query}.#{e}", :type=>:class}} +
        instance_methods.each {|e| methods << {:name=>"#{query}.#{e}", :type=>:instance}}
      menu(methods, :fields=>[:name, :type]) do |chosen|
        system_ri(*chosen.map {|e| e[:name]})
      end
    else
      results = ri_driver.select_methods(/#{query}/)
      menu(results, :fields=>['full_name'], :ask=>false) do |chosen|
        system_ri(*chosen.map {|e| e['full_name']})
      end    
    end
  end
  
  def system_ri(*queries)
    ::Hirb::View.capture_and_render { RDoc::RI::Driver.run(queries) }
  end
{% endhighlight%} </notextile>

I'll let you figure out how the above works. Let's just use it:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  # Wouldn't it be nice to page as above
  >> Hirb.enable
  => nil
  >> ri Array
  +--------+--------------------------+----------+
  | number | name                     | type     |
  +--------+--------------------------+----------+
  | 1      | Array.[]                 | class    |
  | 2      | Array.new                | class    |
  | 3      | Array.&                  | instance |
  | 4      | Array.*                  | instance |
  | 5      | Array.+                  | instance |
  | 6      | Array.-                  | instance |
  | 7      | Array.<<                 | instance |
  | 8      | Array.<=>                | instance |
  | 9      | Array.==                 | instance |
  | 10     | Array.[]                 | instance |
  # omitting the other 71 rows for brevity
  Choose: 1-10
  # Out comes the documentation for the 2 class methods and the first 8 instance methods.

  # If we want to filter a subset of a class, just pass a second argument to be interpreted as a regex.
  # Any methods containing 'to'
  >> ri Array, :to
  +--------+---------------+----------+
  | number | name          | type     |
  +--------+---------------+----------+
  | 1      | Array.to_a    | instance |
  | 2      | Array.to_ary  | instance |
  | 3      | Array.to_s    | instance |
  | 4      | Array.to_yaml | instance |
  +--------+---------------+----------+
  Choose:
</pre></notextile>

In the first example above, paging works not only for the menu but also for all the ri output. If you take a look at the above @ri()@ method, you'll see that it wrap ri's output with a @Hirb::View.capture_and_render@ block. As you may have guessed, that method capture's ri's STDOUT and run's it through Hirb's pager.

If you're curious, the actual ri library I use in irb is "here":http://github.com/cldwalker/irbfiles/blob/9f89694eddd05e534c795a508f072c23e64b91d2/.irb/libraries/ri.rb. It covers some more ri edge cases I didn't go into here. That library could easily be made into a command if you want. To use it in irb, drop this in your irbrc:
<notextile><pre class="console">
  require 'hirb'
  Hirb.enable
  extend Hirb::Console
  load "/path/to/ri_library"
  class << self; include Ri; end
</pre></notextile>

h2. Wrapping Up With A Wrap Challenge

In wrapping this up, I'd like to mention the hirb config "file format has changed":http://tagaholic.me/hirb/doc/classes/Hirb.html. Basically you don't need to nest everything under the @:view@ key. Also, I'd like to mention that this release has an improved algorithm for automatically rendering "console tables":/2009/03/13/hirb-irb-on-the-good-stuff.html that don't wrap. So if you set your width and height correctly, as explained above, I challenge you to pass Hirb's @table()@ arrays that cause it to wrap.