---
layout: post
title: Changing Readline Completions With a Key Combo
keywords: ruby bond, changing readline completions, readline macro, readline completion, ruby readline, ruby autocompletion, readline tricks, readline tips, readline macro example, readline keybinding, readline key combo, readline key sequence
description: <a href="http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html">Readline</a> has the powerful concept of a macro which maps a key combo to anything you can type. We'll look at using a readline macro to trigger ruby code in a ruby shell. Since ruby has the <a href="http://tagaholic.me/bond/">gem bond</a> to easily define readline completions, we'll change completion behavior with the flick of a key combo.
tags:
- gem:name=bond
- lib:name=irb
- post:topic=completion
- post:lang=ruby
- post:type=tutorial
related_tag: '*:*=bond'
---
{{ page.description }}

h2. Intro

First off, you should be aware that what follows can be done with any readline, non-ruby completion setup that allows painless redefinition of a completion.

Defining and redefining completions are easy in ruby with "bond":http://github.com/cldwalker/bond/tree/master :

<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb -rubygems -rbond
  >> Bond.complete(:method=>'shoot') { %w{No Big Goldfinger} }
  => true
  >> shoot 'G[TAB]
  >> shoot 'Goldfinger'

  # Redefine completion with same condition (:method=>'shoot') but different completion behavior
  >> Bond.recomplete(:method=>'shoot', :search=>:anywhere) { %w{Hammerstein Grubozaboyschikov Spang} }
  => true
  >> shoot 'b[TAB]
  >> shoot 'Grubozaboyschikov'
</pre></notextile>

h2. Readline Macros

If you use the console enough, "readline":http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html is your friend. You've probably "read the docs":http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/readline.html and made your own @~/.inputrc@. What we care about here is readline's macros. With a macro, you can map a keystroke combo to any number of keystrokes. These mapped keystrokes can even include keystrokes that trigger other readline macros or that hit enter to execute something in a shell! Just for fun, let's execute some ruby code in irb with a keystroke combo. Drop this in your ~/.inputrc:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  # Only defined when using ruby's readline library i.e. in irb
  $if Ruby
    "\C-x\C-p": "puts \"So many keystrokes. So little time.\"\n"
  $endif
</pre></notextile>

Start irb and press Control-X Control-P:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  bash> irb
  >> [C-xC-p]
  >> puts "So many keystrokes. So little time."
  So many keystrokes. So little time.
  => nil
</pre></notextile>

Ruby code executed at the flick of a key combo!

h2. Ruby Readline Example

I like method completion to autocomplete any method an object responds to ... most of the time. But if I'm using a new ruby gem and it's unfamiliar objects, I usually want to try out its functionality. Irb's default method completion makes this painful since completion gives you _all_ the methods an objects responds to. Sure, I can call @self.class.instance_methods(false)@ on an object but why do that every time when I can just change an object's completion behavior with a key combo? Here's the following method I use to toggle object completion for "bond/completion":http://github.com/cldwalker/bond/blob/f67187b7aa1a5339d3e03a9ac5cbb0b30215d889/lib/bond/completion.rb :

{% highlight ruby %}
  def toggle_object_complete
    # default mode
    if @object_complete
      Bond.recomplete(:object=>'Object', :place=>:last)
      Bond.recomplete(:object=>'Object', :on=>/([^.\s]+)\.([^.\s]*)$/, :place=>:last)
    else
      non_inherited_methods = proc {|e| 
        e.object.is_a?(Module) ? e.object.methods(false) : e.object.class.instance_methods(false)
      }
      Bond.recomplete(:object=>'Object', :place=>:last, &non_inherited_methods)
      Bond.recomplete(:object=>'Object', :on=>/([^.\s]+)\.([^.\s]*)$/, :place=>:last, &non_inherited_methods)
    end
    @object_complete = !@object_complete
  end
{% endhighlight %}

This method checks the current toggle state and switches between the two completion definitions per call. Notice that two completions are redefined since bond/completion uses two completion definitions to control an object's method completion.

Now let's map this to method to a key combo in ~/.inputrc:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  $if Ruby
    "\C-x\C-p": "toggle_object_complete\n"
  $endif
</pre></notextile>

Let's try this key combo in the console:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  >> # copy and paste the toggle_object_complete method

  # Default method completion
  >> Bond.agent.[TAB]
  Bond.agent.__id__                      Bond.agent.freeze                      Bond.agent.iv                          Bond.agent.private_methods             Bond.agent.taint
  Bond.agent.__send__                    Bond.agent.frozen?                     Bond.agent.kind_of?                    Bond.agent.protected_methods           Bond.agent.tainted?
  Bond.agent.call                        Bond.agent.giv                         Bond.agent.line_buffer                 Bond.agent.public_methods              Bond.agent.to_a
  Bond.agent.class                       Bond.agent.grep                        Bond.agent.local_methods               Bond.agent.recomplete                  Bond.agent.to_s
  Bond.agent.clone                       Bond.agent.hash                        Bond.agent.ls                          Bond.agent.reset                       Bond.agent.to_yaml
  Bond.agent.complete                    Bond.agent.id                          Bond.agent.metaclass                   Bond.agent.respond_to?                 Bond.agent.to_yaml_properties
  Bond.agent.create_mission              Bond.agent.inspect                     Bond.agent.method                      Bond.agent.send                        Bond.agent.to_yaml_style
  Bond.agent.default_mission             Bond.agent.instance_eval               Bond.agent.methods                     Bond.agent.setup                       Bond.agent.type
  Bond.agent.display                     Bond.agent.instance_of?                Bond.agent.mgrep                       Bond.agent.singleton_methods           Bond.agent.untaint
  Bond.agent.dup                         Bond.agent.instance_variable_defined?  Bond.agent.missions                    Bond.agent.siv                         Bond.agent.which
  Bond.agent.eql?                        Bond.agent.instance_variable_get       Bond.agent.mls                         Bond.agent.sort_last_missions          
  Bond.agent.equal?                      Bond.agent.instance_variable_set       Bond.agent.mwhich                      Bond.agent.spy                         
  Bond.agent.extend                      Bond.agent.instance_variables          Bond.agent.nil?                        Bond.agent.taguri                      
  Bond.agent.find_mission                Bond.agent.is_a?                       Bond.agent.object_id                   Bond.agent.taguri=                     
  
  # Let's use our key combo to just see what's relevant.
  >> [C-xC-p]
  >> toggle_object_complete
  => true
  >> Bond.agent.[TAB]
  Bond.agent.call                Bond.agent.create_mission      Bond.agent.find_mission        Bond.agent.recomplete          Bond.agent.sort_last_missions  
  Bond.agent.complete            Bond.agent.default_mission     Bond.agent.missions            Bond.agent.reset               Bond.agent.spy

  >> Bond.agent.missions[0].[TAB]
  Bond.agent.missions[0].method_condition  Bond.agent.missions[0].set_input         Bond.agent.missions[0].unique_id

  # When we want to change back to default method completion
  >> [C-xC-p]
  >> toggle_object_complete
  => false
</pre></notextile>

Sweet. With a simple key combo, we can now alter method completion for any ruby object! One shortcoming you can see is that the key combo must be executed when in a blank line. Otherwise you'll end up executing what's already in the line as well. It's possible to bypass this if anyone ever gets around to writing a Ruby binding for setting readline's line buffer with @rl_replace_line()@. If I ever get around to brushing up on C one of these days...

h2. Outro

There are two cool ideas I hope you got from this. First, changing completion behavior with a key combo isn't limited to a ruby shell. With bash, you could map a key combo to call a bash function that redefines completions with bash's @complete()@. Second, when in a ruby shell, you can execute any ruby code with a simple key combo. Although I only looked at changing completion behavior with key combos, there are an endless number of possibilities to be played with. I'm curious to see what others will come up with. If you're hungering for more readline configuration tips, "check out":http://github.com/cldwalker/dotfiles/blob/master/.inputrc "my inputrc":http://github.com/cldwalker/dotfiles/blob/master/.input.
