---
layout: post
title: One9 - Upgrade to Ruby 1.9 Now
keywords: ruby 1.9 changes, upgrade ruby 1.9, ruby 1.9.2 changes, ruby 1.9 changelog, one9 ruby, ruby 2to3, convert ruby 1.9
description: So <a href="http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/downloads/">ruby 1.9.2</a> is the future and your still stuck on 1.8 at work.  Why? It's a pain ... Well, let's change that. Introducing <a href="http://github.com/cldwalker/one9">one9</a> - a gem to find 1.9 method changes and make the upgrade process smoother.
tags:
  - gem:name=one9
  - gem:topic=ruby19
  - post:lang=ruby
  - post:type=tutorial
---
{{page.description}}

h2. Install

No surprises here.
<notextile><pre class="console">
  gem install one9
</pre></notextile>

h2. How it works

one9 runs your 1.8 test suite, spies on methods that have changed and saves the locations of their calls
for later viewing. If you have a supported editor, it drops into an editor to let you sequentially
view and possibly fix each change. Although one9 gives you a brief message for each change, I
recommend familiarizing yourself with "1.9":http://eigenclass.org/hiki/Changes+in+Ruby+1.9 "changes":https://github.com/ruby/ruby/raw/ruby_1_9_1/NEWS. To see what one9 knows about 1.9 changes:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  $ one9 changes
  +-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
  | method                            | message                                                          | type   |
  +-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
  | Module#constants                  | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings             | change |
  | Module#public_methods             | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings             | change |
  | Module#instance_methods           | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings             | change |
  | Module#singleton_methods          | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings             | change |
  | Module#public_instance_methods    | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings             | change |
  | Module#protected_methods          | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings             | change |
  ...
</pre></notextile>

h2. Run tests

First off, run your tests in the root directory of a gem or Rails app:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  # Runs `rake test` by default
  $ one9 test

  # To run any other test command, just prefix it with one9 test:
  # Run all cucumber specs
  $ one9 test cucumber

  # Only run model specs
  $ one9 test rspec spec/models
</pre></notextile>

After your tests run, one9 prints a report. Here's what it all looks like for "boson":http://github.com/cldwalker/boson:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  $ one9 test
  ...............................................................................................
  ...............................................................................................
  ...............................................................................................
  ...............
  Finished in 0.704555 seconds.

  300 tests, 580 assertions, 0 failures, 0 errors

  ** One9 Report **
  +---------------------------------+-------+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | method                          | count | message                                                      | type   | lines                                                        |
  +---------------------------------+-------+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Module#instance_methods         | 5     | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings         | change | lib/boson/util.rb:39:in `detect',lib/boson/util.rb:40:in ... |
  | Module#private_instance_methods | 2     | Returns array of symbols instead of array of strings         | change | lib/boson/inspectors/argument_inspector.rb:23:in `scrape_... |
  | Hash#to_s                       | 4     | An alias of #inspect instead of a spaceless join of the e... | change | lib/boson/loader.rb:87:in `initialize_library_module',lib... |
  | Hash#select                     | 4     | Returns a hash instead of an association array               | change | lib/boson/loader.rb:109:in `set_library_commands',lib/bos... |
  +---------------------------------+-------+--------------------------------------------------------------+--------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
  4 rows in set
</pre></notextile>

As you can see the report lists changed methods, how many times they were
called and where they were called from. To reprint this list any time later, run @one9 list@.

Note: When you run @one9 test@ it _overwrites_ the previous @one test@ result.

h2. Edit Changes

Now that you have a list of changed method calls, editing those changes is easy:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  # Open all changes
  $ one9 edit

  # To only open a subset of changes:
  # Only open Hash changes
  $ one9 edit Hash

  # Only open Hash#to_s changes
  $ one9 edit Hash#to_s
</pre></notextile>

Currently this opens the quickfix list in vim. (For vim noobs, navigate between changes with @:cn@
and @:cp@.) "Patches":https://github.com/cldwalker/one9/pulls for emacs and other editors welcome :)
Remember each change is a *possible* change. Only change the code if the new 1.9 behavior is going
to break the existing code.

For those without editing support, you can still view each line where there's a method change:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  $ one9 lines
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | method                          | line                                                                |
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Module#instance_methods         | lib/boson/util.rb:39:in `detect'                                    |
  | Module#instance_methods         | lib/boson/util.rb:40:in `detect'                                    |
  | Module#instance_methods         | lib/boson/loader.rb:101:in `check_for_method_conflicts'             |
  | Module#instance_methods         | lib/boson/util.rb:44:in `detect'                                    |
  | Module#instance_methods         | lib/boson/namespace.rb:28:in `boson_commands'                       |
  ...
</pre></notextile>

Once you've fixed your changes, give your code a 1.9 test run. If tests are still broken, then jump
down to "this section":#additional_changes.

h2. Rails Tips

Skip this section if you're not on a Rails app.

So you've finished editing your code and tests pass. You're done, right? Not in my opinion. My code
is only as good as the code it depends on. I'd check each of my app's dependencies and check for any
1.9 breakages. For each gem:

1. cd to the gem: @cd `bundle show $GEM`@
2. Install the gem's development dependencies: @gem install $GEM --dev@
3. Run tests with one9: @one9 test WITH PROPER COMMAND@
4. Edit gem's changes : @one9 edit@
5. Verify tests pass on 1.9.
6. Fork, patch, pull as needed

h2. Configure

one9 comes with a decent list of 1.9 changes and descriptions. If you'd like to add your
own changes, add them to your ~/.one9rc. For example:

<notextile><pre class="console">
  # For methods that have changed in 1.9
  change 'Class#instance_method', 'Some description'

  # For methods that have been deleted in 1.9
  delete 'Class.class_method', 'Some description'
</pre></notextile>

For more examples, "see the defaults that one9 defines":https://github.com/cldwalker/one9/blob/master/lib/one9/defaults.rb. If I've missed an important 1.9 change, "feel free to fork and pull":https://github.com/cldwalker/one9/pulls.

h2(#additional_changes). "Additional 1.9 Changes":#additional_changes

So even if you've dealt with all changed methods, there are still other changes that could effect your code:

* Encoding: Probably the most significant and thus well documented. See "JEG's thorough articles":http://blog.grayproductions.net/articles/understanding_m17n
* "scoping of block variables, splat operator and block arguments":http://dablog.rubypal.com/2009/1/14/10-things-to-be-aware-of-in-moving-to-ruby-1-9
* files in @$LOAD_PATH@ and @$LOADED_FEATURES@ are expanded
* using colon (:) instead of "then" in an if/unless/case is deprecated
* retry in a loop or iterator is deprecated
* @$KCODE@, @$=@ and @VERSION*@ constants are deprecated
* @?x@ now returns a single character string instead of an integer
* For anything I may have missed see "the official changelog":https://github.com/ruby/ruby/raw/ruby_1_9_1/NEWS or the "unoffical one":http://eigenclass.org/hiki/Changes+in+Ruby+1.9

h2. Motivation

This gem aims to get the ruby community to seriously use 1.9.2 and to port as many of the 1.8 gems
to 1.9. Since this gem maintains a list of 1.9 changes, it could be used as a multi-purpose tool.
Some ideas for future commands:

* grep command to grep code for changed methods. Basically for porting test-deprived code.
* info command to explain a method's change in detail with examples and possible solutions
* rails command to ease porting a rails app and all its dependencies.
* automating code changes like "python's 2to3":http://docs.python.org/py3k/library/2to3.html

If you're interested in implementing these or other such commands, "please do contribute":https://github.com/cldwalker/one9/pulls.

h2. Conclusion

Ruby 1.9.2 isn't the future, it's already here. So why are you waiting?
